SOURCE TITLE: NETSOL unveils the Transcend platform to provide customers with a unified digital retail and asset finance solution
SOURCE FILE: blog_transcend-platform-launch.html
==================================================

NETSOL unveils the Transcend platform to provide customers with a unified digital retail and asset finance solution
Blog
NETSOL unveils the Transcend platform to provide customers with a unified digital retail and asset finance solution
By
NETSOL Technologies
, on October 9, 2024
Unlock the future of finance with NETSOL’s latest AI-powered Transcend Platform, designed to transform how assets are bought, leased, and financed. Explore now!
Table of Contents
Share this Blog:
We are extremely proud to announce the launch of our Transcend Platform - an AI-powered digital retail and asset finance solutions for automotive and equipment OEMs, auto captives, commercial lenders, dealers, brokers, banks and other financial institutions. The new NETSOL Transcend Finance Platform offers a robust set of products and solutions under one umbrella, showcasing our commitment to harnessing the transformative potential of AI.
Unlock the future of finance with Transcend
The Transcend Platform, powered by NETSOL, is an AI-driven unified ecosystem that revolutionizes how assets are sold, financed and leased. Designed to automate and optimize every step - from sales to originations to servicing, Transcend leverages AI and ML to drive predictive insights and smarter decision-making. Our managed services ensure seamless implementation and ongoing support, allowing your business to focus on growth while we handle the technology.
The Transcend Platform signifies NETSOL's transformation and adoption of AI technologies for asset finance companies and OEMs. This comprehensive platform addresses various use-cases, from asset, auto and equipment finance and leasing technology to innovative digital retail solutions facilitating complex purchasing journeys. NETSOL customers like MINI USA - a subsidiary of BMW - have had significant success with the platform, achieving a 23% increase in average conversion rate from lead to sales over three years.
Future-ready, Transcend empowers organizations with the tools and insights needed to thrive in a fast-evolving, digital-first world.
Innovation at every layer of your operations
AI at the core: Harness artificial intelligence and machine learning to power predictive insights, automated workflows and risk management across the finance ecosystem.
A platform that evolves with you:
With integrated frameworks and powerful data management, Transcend provides a secure foundation so you're always ready for what's next.
Future-ready infrastructure:
Build your platform with API-first modular components, offering cross-platform capabilities and customizable solutions that scale as your business grows.
Enterprise-level security:
With Transcend's enterprise-grade cloud security, your financial transactions and sensitive data are safeguarded with the latest protections so that you have peace of mind.
The Transcend Platform: Tailored solutions for every stage of your business
Transcend Retail
Revolutionize auto and equipment retail with a fully digital, integrated platform that simplifies the entire customer journey. From online purchasing to finance approval,
Transcend Retail
(Formerly known as Otoz) offers advanced retail and mobility solutions that keep your dealership or OEM at the cutting edge of consumer expectations.
Transcend Finance
Streamline your finance and leasing operations with a comprehensive solution for originations, servicing and
wholesale finance software
. Transcend Finance (Formerly known as Ascent) empowers finance and leasing companies and financial institutions with end-to-end visibility and control, ensuring seamless workflows and accelerated business outcomes.
Transcend Marketplace
The go-to platform for modular, API-first solutions that address every aspect of finance and leasing. Whether you need tools for calculations, document generation, loan originations or lending configurations,
Transcend Marketplace
(Formerly known as Appex Now) offers a suite of flexible, component-based solutions that integrate seamlessly with your existing infrastructure.
Transcend Consultancy
Empowering businesses with Transcend Consulting Services, we offer expert guidance across critical areas like information security, data engineering and cloud services. Our team partners with your business to create tailored solutions that drive innovation, efficiency and growth.
Transcend AI Labs
We are leading AI-driven innovation with our Transcend AI Labs, integrating advanced AI services into our product suite to solve the unique challenges of BFSI, equipment and auto OEMs and dealerships. Our tailored solutions drive industry-specific advancements, helping you stay ahead in a competitive market.
By consolidating all our cutting-edge product offerings into a single, intuitive platform, we will revolutionize the way financial institutions operate, delivering unparalleled efficiency, reliability and value to our customers and partners in an increasingly complex and constantly changing marketplace.
The
Transcend Finance Platform
is more than a suite of products and solutions - it is a visionary step towards a future where technology uplifts every aspect of asset finance and leasing as well as digital retail experiences. By integrating AI into the core of our offerings, NETSOL is not only continuing to meet the unique needs of individual clients by ensuring scalability and adaptability in a rapidly evolving market landscape but is actively shaping the future of the industry.
The unveiling of the Transcend Platform coincides with the launch of NETSOL's newly redesigned website
netsoltech.com
. The new website reflects the company's commitment to delivering a more comprehensive and user-friendly experience. The revamped site now prominently showcases NETSOL's diverse offerings all under the Transcend Platform. By categorizing its offerings under the platform, NETSOL provides a clearer, more structured and integrated view of how its
asset finance solutions
can address a wide range of industry needs.
Explore the
Transcend Platform
now!
If you're in BFSI (Banking, Financial Services, and Insurance), standing still isn't an option.
Future of Technology
Related
blogs
Blog
Broker-Lender Alignment: The Future of Asset Finance Success
Read more
Blog
From manual friction to intelligent workflows: The next step for equipment finance
Read more
Blog
Cyber resilience in APAC: Why 2026 demands more than traditional defence
Read more