SOURCE TITLE: What is Data Migration: A Guide for Successful Data Migration
SOURCE FILE: blog_what-is-data-migration-a-guide-for-successful-data-migration.html
==================================================

What is Data Migration: A Guide for Successful Data Migration
Blog
What is Data Migration: A Guide for Successful Data Migration
By
NETSOL Technologies
, on July 3, 2023
Following a data migration guide can streamline the process if you’re preparing to replace or upgrade servers to cloud data migration or relocate to a data center.
Table of Contents
Share this Blog:
Data migration refers to transferring data from one place, format, or application to another. Typically, this happens when a new system or location for the data is introduced. When historical systems are replaced or enhanced by new applications using the same dataset, application migration or consolidation is typically the business driver. To improve or change their business, companies now frequently begin data migrations as they switch from on-premises (hosted) infrastructure and applications to cloud-based storage and apps.
What is Data Migration?
Moving data from one place to another, one format to another, or one application to another is known as data migration. Typically, this happens when a new system or location for the data is introduced. Which is why, Data migration is a complicated process that requires careful consideration and planning. There are many different types of data migration, however the success of a data migration process depends on many factors, including the size and complexity of the data, the quality of the source and destination systems, and the availability of resources.
Cloud Data Migration
Organizations are increasingly moving some or all of their data to the cloud to access its migration advantages, such as improved scalability, accelerated time to market, and the ability to save money on technical staff. To retain data on-site and within the organization’s physical resources, data architects used to be entrusted with setting up enormous server farms.
A common reservation surrounding   cloud security contributed to the decision to move forward with on-site servers. This migration barrier has, however, mainly been removed as major platforms embrace security procedures that bring them to the level of traditional IT security and necessarily in conformity with the GDPR.
When is Data Migration Required?
When present hardware is updated, a new system is switched over, or when circumstances like application replacements, modifications to business processes, data volume expansion, or the need for better performance arises, data migration consequently follows. Although there are many reasons for data migration, the most frequent one is to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of your IT operations and your whole business. Better formatted data can be used more effectively. The need for, and the cost of, several systems and pieces of hardware is reduced when data is stored in a single location and a single format. However, poorly executed data migrations could have negative consequences. As a result, inaccurate data, redundancies, and other issues could develop and need to be fixed after the fact. An unsuccessful data transfer attempt may even destroy precise, well-organized data.
If you’re reading this blog, you’ve already decided to start a data migration project and are seeking more advice. We at NETSOL Cloud Services provide AWS database migration service, intelligent cloud solutions, and services, meeting the demand and requirements of an emerging future to make a difference, from cloud storage to cloud backup.
Types of Data Migration
Businesses upgrading their systems or expanding their data centers can benefit from cloud data migration in several ways. This progression is relatively natural for many companies. By utilizing the cloud, enterprises want to boost top-line growth, increase agility, save capital expenditures, and pay for only what they require when they require it. The amount of time that IT workers can devote to other tasks will depend on the type of migration carried out.
Design in an infographic layout with icons for all types of migration.
Storage migration:
Transferring data from outdated arrays to more contemporary ones so that other systems can access it. This enables typical data management capabilities like cloning, snapshots, backup, and disaster recovery while providing noticeably quicker performance and a more affordable scale.
Cloud migration:
Transferring information, software, or other business components from a local data center to a cloud or from one cloud to another. It frequently also involves storage relocation.
Application migration:
The process of transferring an application program between environments. Changing the form of an application hosted by a software provider could involve relocating its core data or shifting the entire application from an on-premises IT center to the cloud.
Like what you’re  reading? Click here to learn more about T
hree Ways AI Can Enhance the Customer Experience
or
get in touch
with us for AWS database migration service.
Critical Steps in a Data Migration Strategy
Based on the demands and objectives of the organization, each strategy differs in particular, but generally speaking, a data migration strategy should stick to the following identifiable pattern:
1- Define and Design the Migration
Organizations decide whether to migrate in a vast explosion or a trickle throughout the design process. It also entails outlining the migration procedures and the technical architecture of the solution. You can start by defining deadlines and any project problems after considering the design, the data to be pulled over, and the destination system. The entire project should be documented by the time this step is complete. earnings.
2- Choosing a Migration Approach.
Data can be moved using the extensive bang method (doing it all at once over a short period) or the trickling method (migrating in phases while the source and target systems run side by side). The former process may look appealing when moving large datasets because it promises to finish migration quickly. However, in practice, it is not a standard solution for most businesses (apart from the tiny ones), as it might result in significant downtime for mission-critical systems, and any faults could render operations impossible, lasting longer.
Because data migration is a more involved process requiring a carefully thought-out design, most businesses still migrate data in iterations. Additionally, it involves more effort from data engineers, who must keep track of what data has been transferred and initiate migration updates if any data changes, and data users, who must switch between the two systems during the migration. On the plus side, if implemented correctly, this method causes no significant downtimes or operational interruptions and makes it easier to identify and address defects and problems as they arise.
Why NETSOL for data migration?
3- Preparing data
It’s time to get your data ready for transfer after you’ve evaluated the project’s scope, organized your data migration team, and put the essential infrastructure in place.
4- Audit Trail
The data scope chosen for migration must be collected into a single repository and thoroughly checked for any conflicts, inconsistencies, duplicates, missing chunks, and quality problems. Since this stage requires a lot of labor, automated tools are typically used to complete it. Before data migration, all issues that have been found must be fixed.
5- Data Backup
You cannot anticipate every issue that can occur during the execution of a migration and cause data loss or damage. Hence, creating an additional layer of protection and backing up your data, especially the files you plan to relocate. In doing so, you will be able to restore any data required if something goes wrong.
KEY STATS:
Within a year following a disaster, 93% of businesses who lost their data center for ten days or more filed for bankruptcy.
94% of businesses that experience a catastrophic data loss fail; 43% never reopen, and 51% shut down within two years.
6- Data Governance
To create the framework for big data governance, identify the individuals with authority to access, modify, and delete data. Then, map these roles and access levels to the new system. It can help prevent misunderstandings, delays, and security breaches by ensuring your team knows their roles and responsibilities before, during, and after data migration.
Using a just enough development strategy when dealing with migration can be tempting. Correcting implementation is essential, as you will only do it once. One systematic approach is to divide the data into smaller groups, developing each category separately, followed by a test. Building and testing may make sense if an organization engages in a massive migration.
7- Data Validation and Preparation
The selected data is then thoroughly examined for duplications, collisions, missing pieces, incoherence, and quality problems. The data migration process flow includes a difficult step that is usually automated. However, only some issues that can disrupt data transport or cause component loss can be anticipated. Data engineers, especially those with portable components, offer additional security protection and backup for all data. You can completely restore your data in the event of any problems.
Experts from
NETSOL
offer assistance with customizing and establishing access rights and responsibilities. Your data management framework is demonstrated in this manner. Every person in your organization will know their duties, preventing delays and safety concerns.
8- Execution of the data migration plan
It is important to ensure that the appropriate system permissions are applied by your plans to enable successful data migration and then extract all of the data that is moving from the source system to the destination system. Moreover, ascertain that the information is cleansed to safeguard the target system before converting it to the correct format for transmission. Lastly, t, import your cleaned and duplicated data into the destination system according to the data migration guidelines you’ve already created. It is crucial to keep a close eye on your data migration as it happens so that you can spot and remedy any issues timely.
9- Post Analysis and Maintenance
Database migration to a new system does not end with data migration. Once the host system is operational,
NETSOL
experts continuously evaluate and track performance. They perform a thorough system check to ensure that the data is accurate. These audits are routinely conducted to see whether the system adequately addresses and caters to customer satisfaction, data volume, and quality.
Getting Started with Data Migration
Data migration is coming if your company is modernizing its systems, switching to the cloud, or consolidating its data. It’s a sizable and significant undertaking, and the accuracy of the data requires for  it be conducted and completed properly. Please get in touch with us by clicking
here
for more information on how to begin your data migration process.
With highly qualified AWS resources, NETSOL delivers decades of transformation, modernization, AWS data migration services, and analytics experience.
If you're in BFSI (Banking, Financial Services, and Insurance), standing still isn't an option.
Future of Technology
Related
blogs
Blog
Broker-Lender Alignment: The Future of Asset Finance Success
Read more
Blog
From manual friction to intelligent workflows: The next step for equipment finance
Read more
Blog
Cyber resilience in APAC: Why 2026 demands more than traditional defence
Read more